
90-02/BeingInNothingness

BEING IN NOTHINGNESS
Virtual Reality and the Pioneers of Cyberspace

By John Perry Barlow
Published in Microtimes Magazine

"Cyberspace.  A consensual hallucination experienced daily 
by billions of legitimate operators, in every nation...A 
graphic representation of data abstracted from the banks of 
every computer in the human system.  Unthinkable 
complexity.  Lines of light ranged in the nonspace of the 
mind, clusters and constellations of data.  Like city lights, 
receding..."
			--William Gibson, Neuromancer

Suddenly I don't have a body anymore.  

All that remains of the aging shambles which usually constitutes my 
corporeal self  is a glowing, golden hand floating before me like 
Macbeth's dagger.  I point my finger and drift down its length to the 
bookshelf on the office wall.

I try to grab a book but my hand passes through it.  

"Make a fist inside the book and you'll have it," says my invisible 
guide.  

I do, and when I move my hand again, the book remains embedded in 
it.  I open my hand and withdraw it.  The book remains suspended 
above the shelf.

I look up.  Above me I can see the framework of red girders which 
supports the walls of the office...above them the blue-blackness of 
space.  The office has no ceiling, but it hardly needs one.  There's never 
any weather here.  

I point up and begin my ascent, passing right through one of the 
overhead beams on my way up.  Several hundred feet above the office, 
I look down.  It sits in the middle of a little island in space.   I 
remember the home asteroid of The Little Prince with its one volcano, 
it's one plant.

How very like the future this place might be: a tiny world just big 
enough to support the cubicle of one Knowledge Worker.  I feel a wave 
of loneliness and head back down.  But I'm going too fast.  I plunge 
right on through the office floor and into the bottomless indigo below.  
Suddenly I can't remember how to stop and turn around.  Do I point 
behind myself?  Do I have to turn around before I can point?  I flip into 
brain fugue.

"Just relax," says my guide in her cool clinical voice.  "Point straight 
up and open your hand when you get where you want to be."

Sure.  But how can you get where you want to be when you're coming 
from nowhere at all?  

And I don't seem to have a location exactly.  In this pulsating new 
landscape, I've been reduced to a point of view.  The whole subject of  
"me" yawns into a chasm of interesting questions.  It's like Disneyland 
for epistomologists.  "If a virtual tree falls in the computer-generated 
forest..?"  Or "How many cybernauts can dance on the head of a 
shaded solid?"  Gregory Bateson would have loved this.  Wittgenstein, 
phone home. 

At least I know where I left my body.  It's in a room called Cyberia in a 
building called Autodesk in a town called Sausalito, California.  Planet 
Earth.  Milky Way.  So on and so forth.  My body is cradled in its usual 
cozy node of space-time vectors.

But I...or "I"...am in cyberspace, a universe churned up from computer 
code by a Compaq 386 and a pair of Matrox graphics boards, then fed 
into my rods and cones by  VPL Eyephones, a set of goggles through 
whose twin, parallax-corrected video screens I see this new world.  

When I move my head, the motion is tracked by a a Polhemus 
magnetic sensor and the imaging engine of cyberspace is instructed to 
alter what I see accordingly.  Thus, having made a controlled ascent 
back up through the floor of the "office," I turn to the left and I see red 
chair with a desk behind it.  I turn to the right and I see a door leading 
out onto the floating platform.  

The configuration and position of my right hand is fed into the system 
by a VPL DataGlove, also with an Polhemus attached to it.  The 
relationship between my hand and the eyephones is precisely 
measured by the two trackers so that my hand appears where I would 
expect it to.  When I point or make a fist, the fiber optics sewn into the 
DataGlove convert kinesthetics into electronics.  For a decisecond or so, 
my hand disappears and then reappears, glowing and toon-like, in the 
appropriate shape.

Despite the current confines of my little office-island, I know that I 
have become a traveller in a realm which will be ultimately bounded 
only by human imagination, a world without any of the usual limits of 
geography, growth, carrying capacity, density or ownership.  In this 
magic theater, there's no gravity, no Second Law of Thermodynamics, 
indeed, no laws at all beyond those imposed by computer processing 
speed...and given the accelerating capacity of that constraint, this 
universe will probably expand faster than the one I'm used to.

Welcome to Virtual Reality.  We've leapt through the looking glass.  
Now what?  Go ask Alice.


      


The Next Big Thing
Money from Nuthin'

"I think this is the biggest thing since we landed on the Moon," says 
Jaron Lanier, the dread-locked CEO of VPL Research.  (Who was 9 
years old at that time.)  I don't choke on that one.  Indeed, I'd take it a 
bit farther, guessing that Columbus was probably the last person to 
behold so much usable and unclaimed real estate (or unreal estate) as 
these cybernauts have discovered.

At Autodesk, the Sausalito publisher of AutoCAD drafting software, 
they spent the summer of T89 in product development heaven, talking 
telephone, automobile, airplane, computer.  They invoked Edison, Bell, 
Ford, and Jobs.  And there was that loincloth-and-machete sense of 
enterprise which one might have experienced in the Wright Brothers' 
Akron Bicycle Shop or Paul Jobs' garage in Mountain View...as well as 
countless less-chronicled shots at perpetual motion or baldness cures.

Neil Armstrong's small step ran about 70 Billion Real Dollars, but 
when John Walker, the Hacker King of Autodesk, committed his 
company to creating the first commercially-available "world in a can," 
he figured that the prototype "gizmo" could be built for about $25,000.     

VPL, the other trading post on VR frontier, isn't much fatter, although 
internal synergy seems to magnify output.  Since their incorporation in 
1985, they've had two Scientific American covers and produced the 
DataGlove, DataSuit, the PowerGlove, Swivel 3-D and VPL 
EyePhones, the only commercially available head-mounted display.  
They've been in a couple of big lawsuits (one, just concluded to their 
satisfaction, with Stanford University), and create, at a distance, the 
mirage of a fair-sized company going at it pretty hard.  

But up close, one can get on a first-name basis with every VPL 
employee in the course of an afternoon. They have yet to outgrow the 
third floor of their slightly tacky building at the Redwood City yacht 
harbor.

While Apple's research gazillions yield such dubious fruit as 
multimedia and the AppleFax Modem, while IBM replicates methods 
for chaining bureaucrats to its mainframes,  it begins to appear that the 
Next Big Thing will begin its commercial evolution as humbly as the 
personal computer.

As usual, the Big Guys have neither the means nor the desire to engage 
in such open-ended creation as settling the virtual universe will 
require.  Like the Union Pacific Railroad awaiting the fact of empire, 
they prefer to let the rag-tag pioneers die all over the frontier before 
they come out to claim it.  

When the Altairs and Osbornes of Virtual Reality have made their fatal 
errors are headed for Chapter 11, IBM probably will issue forth the 
SolutionStation VR Network or some such and accelerate natural 
selection in the field.

But as I write this, VPL and Autodesk still have  it to themselves.  
Actually, they are not the first to make virtual landfall. They are only 
the first at financial risk. Unlike the first automobiles or telephones 
their commercial fledglings had the advantage of long incubation by 
government and Academia.

Virtual Reality, as a concept, found first form at the University of Utah 
over twenty years ago in the fecund cranium of Ivan E. Sutherland, the 
godfather of computer graphics and the originator of about every  Big 
Computer Idea not originated by Alan Kay or Doug Englebart.  In 
1968, he produced the first head-mounted display.  This was the 
critical element in VR hardware, but it was so heavy that it had to be 
suspended from the ceiling...at some peril to its wearer.  Damocles was 
mentioned.

Besides, once you got it on, there wasn't much to see in there.  There 
wasn't a computer in existence which could churn out enough 
polygons per second to simulate a reality much more full-bodied than 
a game of Pong. 

So Virtual Reality passed a generation waiting for the equipment to 
arrive.  In 1985 the Japanese finally (and unintentionally) provided us 
with the right video displays when NASA's Mike McGreevy happened 
to notice that the Citizen Watch Co. LCD displays in a Radio Shack 
mini-TV were small enough to fit two in a head-mounted.  

I hardly need to detail what happened to CPU horsepower during that 
period.  By 1985, graphics engines of appropriate juice were almost 
within financial range of entities not involved in the defense of our 
nation.

Also by this time, NASA had made a strong commitment to VR 
research, though mostly in the service of "telepresence," the ability to 
project one's judgement and actions into a robot located some real 
place you'd rather not be, like space.  They were less persuaded by the 
attractions of unreal places.

The Air Force was also conducting research at Wright-Patterson under 
the direction of Tom Furness, but most of this was directed at the usual 
dismal purpose, simplifying the annihilation of non-virtual humans.  
Heads up displays and looks that kill were their speciality.

For all this expenditure of tax dollars, Virtual Reality still lacked two 
critical elements: a sense of whimsy and a fluid, three-dimensional 
method for "grabbing" and manipulating the furniture of cyberspace.  
VPL was on the case.  

